Jammu and Kashmir is home to several valleys such as the Kashmir Valley, Chenab Valley, Sindh Valley and Lidder Valley. Some major tourist attractions in Jammu and Kashmir are Srinagar, with its renowned Dal Lake and Mughal Gardens, Gulmarg, Pahalgam, Bhaderwah, Patnitop and Jammu. Every year, thousands of Hindu pilgrims visit holy shrines of Vaishno Devi and Amarnath which has had a significant impact on the state's economy.[1]

Kashmir Valley is one of the top tourist destinations of India.[2] Gulmarg, one of the most popular ski resort destinations in India, is also home to the world's highest green golf course.[3] Tourism has declined in the past thirty years.[4]

Jammu and Kashmir also has flower gardens and apple orchards. It attracts tourists for its handicrafts and the Kashmiri shawls.

Major attractions in North Kashmir
The first ever Map of Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir was published in "Konnect Magazine"[citation needed] and then on official Twitter handle of Jammu and Kashmir Tourism.[5] North Kashmir is located mostly in the Himalayan mountains.[6]

Bangus Valley
Between the green hills, streams, and meadows lie a valley In Jammu and Kashmir's Kupwara where the cattle run wild, birds sing lullabies through the day.[citation needed] The place is named Bangus Valley. According to a report,[clarification needed] the valley is located nearly 10,000 meters above sea level (MSL). The Bangus Valley is located in Kupwara district of North Kashmir. It is situated to the West of Handwara town along the Mawri River within the Handwara sub-district. district Kupwara. The term Bangus comes from Sanskrit word Van (Forest) and gus (grass).The valley is nearly 130 km from Srinagar and is situated on the northwestern border of Tehsil Handwara in Kupwara. Divided into two parts-Bod Bungus (Big Bungus) and Lokut Bungus (Small Bungus) the valley spans over an area of 300 km2. Bangus is about 150 kilometres (93 miles) from Srinagar at an altitude of 10,000 feet (3,000 m). The principal valley is locally known as "Boud Bangus" (Big Bangus) and has an estimated area of about 300 square kilometers. It consists of a linear elliptical bowl aligned along the east–west axis and is surrounded by Rajwar and Mawar in the east, Shamasbury and Dajlungun Mountains in the west and Chowkibal and Karnah Guli in the north. It is surrounded by the Shamsbery mountain range and the Leepa Valley, according to the report.[clarification needed] After years of planning,[citation needed] Bangus was recently[when?] made motorable via the Mawer route while work is in full swing on the Chowkibal and Rajwar routes. Its high altitude and unpredictable weather conditions were a huge obstacle but the administration has materialized this project in a short span of time. The Centre recognised 75 new destinations in the Union Territory for tourism this year.[when?] Under the Jal Jeevan Mission and 'Har Ghar Nal Say Jal Mission, the water scarcity days of Kupwara are over. The district constructed 400 Amrit Sarovar in 2022 to support the safe drinking water initiative of the government. The Kupwara District Administration and Tourism Department organized a two-day Bangus Mela earlier this year in August. The event focused on the traditions and culture of the region.[citation needed] Music artists, singers, Kashmiri Rowfdancers, and school report said.[clarification needed] children organized shows for the audience. Pony wallas also put up a special segment with the ponies displaying riding tricks and offering salami to the spectators. The festival folk songs were played nonstop which added to the upbeat atmosphere of the usually quiet valley.[citation needed]

The Lolab Bangus Drang yari Development Authority (LRDDA) installed night-stay tents for tourists. The meadows and slopes of Bungus are enveloped in flowers and medicinal plants such as Macrotima Benthami (gew zaban), Saussurea Sacra (Jugi pedshah), and Aconitum Heterophylleum (patrees). Recently[when?] a new species of flowering medicinal plant ‘Swertia Kashmirensis’ has been discovered in Bungus.[citation needed] The fauna in Bungus includes musk deer, antelope, snow leopards, brown and black bears, monkeys, and red foxes. The bird species include pheasants, tragopan, black partridge, bush quail, and wildfowl. Until two years ago,[when?] the valley was not an easy destination due to its proximity to the LoC (5 km) but the reinstallation of better security systems after the abrogation of Article 370, has helped to increase the faith of explorers who earlier did not find it safe to visit. Previously, visitors had to obtain permits from the District Magistrate to trek and camp but with the ripple effect of the political developments has been so effective that all such restrictions have now been lifted.[citation needed]

As of 2 June 2022, the road connectivity from Handwara side via Mawer is complete. People can take only small cars to Bangus because work on macdamisation is still going on. Vehicles are available on rent basis from Handwara market. Night stay tents are also available there. There are three routes to visit this place. The least distance route from Handwara via Reshwari Mawer. The second route is also from Handwara but via Rajwar and is suitable for trekking only. The third route from Kupwara via Chowkibal.

Bhadrakali Mandir
An ancient idol of Mata Bhadrakali was reinstalled at a temple in Jammu and Kashmir's Kupwara district years after it was brought back from Jammu. The ancient temple at Bhadrakali Village in Handwara wore a festive look as the original idol of the presiding deity, Maa Bhadrakali, was restored to its original abode in a simple ceremony in March 2019.[7] The idol was stolen in 1981 was subsequently recovered and kept in Jammu since 1999. It is believed that during the exodus of Pandits from Handwara, the idol was left behind in the house of Pandit Jaggernath. The nearest airport is Sheikh ul-Alam International Airport in Srinagar located 78.8 kilometers from Handwara. Handwara is not yet connected to railways. The nearest railway station is Baramulla railway station located 30 kilometers from Handwara. Handwara is well-connected with roads and highways. The NH 701 passes through Handwara alongside other intra-town roads.

Tithwal
Tithwal is a small border village about 171 km from Srinagar. After a scenic drive through Sopore, Kupwara and on to Tangdhar, one arrives at Tithwal. Another 80 km and on comes Sharda Peeth. Beyond the Sadhna top lies the Karnah valley along the river Kishan-Ganga and at the edge of it is the last village of North-West Kashmir, Tithwal. At 10600 feet, Sadhna pass[8] nested on the mighty Shamshabari mountain ranges originally known as Nastachun Pass is the only access to the Karnah, Neelam and Leepa valley. In the olden days, Tithwal was the trading hub where hundreds of shops lined up selling ghee, honey and walnut kernels. Those commodities would reach Tithwal from Karnah, Leepa and Neelam valleys. To immerse fully into the surroundings, the Forest Department of J&K, like at many other places, have built Kail and Deodar huts.[citation needed] To reach Tithwal one has to take NH1 from Airport road. After travelling for 45 km on NH1 take a right turn to Sangrama - Sopore road and then turn left onto Sopore - Kupwara road and then follow NH 701 to reach Tithwal.

Ancient Stupa Parihaspora
Paraspore or Paraspur is a small town 22 km North-West of Srinagar in the Kashmir Valley. It was built on a plateau above the Jhelum River by Lalitaditya Muktapida. Parihaspur lost its status as a capital after Lalitaditya's death. His son moved the royal residence. The Jhelum River is to the northeast of Parihaspur as it meets the Sind Nallah at Shadpur sangam. In the past this confluence of the rivers occurred closer to Parihaspur. To reach Paraspore one has to head southwest on Airport Road, make a U-turn to hit NH1. Continue straight on NH1 past M.R. Brand for 55 km and turn left onto Baramula-Gulmarg road and stay on it for 1.2 km to reach the destination.

Detha Mandir
The lord Detha temple[9] is situated in a small village about 105 km from Srinagar.  To reach this temple, one must take a long drive moving from Srinagar to Pattan and onwards to Uri. The century-old map is the key to understanding the wealth of Hindu heritage and culture that Kashmir was once renowned for. One of the most noted monuments documented by many archaeologists, historians and architects is the Datta Mandir located at Banihal near Uri.[citation needed] To reach Detha Mandir one has to head Southwest on Airport Road, make a U-turn to hit NH1and drive for 3.8 km followed by a slight left onto NH1. After a drive of 15 km on NH1 past M.R. Brand, turn left after 1.2 km on to NH1. Stay on this road for 89 km until you reach Datta Temple, Uri.

Gurudwara Thara Sahib, Baramulla
Baramulla is a boulevard surrounded by breathtaking rice fields and meadows. Baramulla is about 55 km from Srinagar. This historic shrine is 8 km away from Baramulla town and 01 km on Baramulla – Srinagar National highway. According to local history, a faqir named Balol and his disciples met Guru Sahib near Kalampura village. They discussed religious discourses with Guru Ji. At the request of people, Guru Ji dug out a fresh water chisma. In the last years of 19th century, a plate form (Thara) 20 x 25 ft. was constructed by S. Matwal Singh Sahni and other Gur Sikhs. Chief Khalsa Dewan Amritsar intellectuals like Bhai Vir Singh, S. Damodar Singh Engineer, S. Narinder Singh and others also visited this place and constructed a Gurdwara in 1928-1931 A.D. The Gurdwara is managed by Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee, Baramulla. To reach Gurudwara Thara Sahib one has to Head Southwest on Airport Road, make a U-turn to hit NH1and drive for 3.8 km followed by a slight left onto NH1. After a drive of 15 km on NH1 past M.R. Brand, turn left after 1.2 km on to NH1. Continue straight for 32 km passing Zehra Crossing and then turn left onto Singhpora-Delina Road. After driving for 2.9 km, turn right onto Singhpora-Kalampora Road for 260mtrs arriving at the destination

Major attractions in South Kashmir
Gulmarg
This section is an excerpt from Gulmarg § Tourism.[edit]

Domestic tourists at Gulmarg
According to CNN, Gulmarg is the "heartland of winter sports in India" and was rated as Asia's seventh best ski destination.[10][11] The town is accessible from Srinagar by road via Tangmarg.

The road climbs uphill in the last 12 kilometres to Gulmarg passing through forests of pine and fir.[12][13][14] Winter sports like skiing, tobogganing, snowboarding and heli-skiing take place on the slopes of Mount Apharwat reachable by a Gondola lift.[15]
Jammu

View of Jammu city and Tawi river
This section is an excerpt from Jammu § Tourism.[edit]
Tourism is the largest industry in Jammu city. It is also a focal point for the pilgrims going to Vaishno Devi and Kashmir valley as it is second last railway terminal in North India. All the routes leading to Kashmir, Poonch, Doda and Laddakh start from Jammu city. So throughout the year, the city remains full of people from all the parts of India. Places of interest include old historic palaces like Mubarak Mandi Palace, Purani Mandi, Rani Park, Amar Mahal, Bahu Fort, Raghunath Temple, Ranbireshwar Temple, Karbala, Peer Meetha, Old city.
Pahalgam

View of the Lidder Valley at Pahalgam
This section is an excerpt from Pahalgam.[edit]
Pahalgam, known as Pahalgom (Kashmiri pronunciation: [pəhəlʲɡoːm]; lit. 'village of shepherds' in Kashmiri)[16] is a town and a notified area committee, near Anantnag city in the Anantnag district of the Indian-administered union territory of Jammu and Kashmir.[17][18][19][20][21] It is a popular tourist destination and hill station. Its lush green meadows and pristine waters attract thousands of tourists from all over the world each year.[22] It is located 45 kilometres (28 mi) from Anantnag on the banks of Lidder River at an altitude of 7,200 feet (2,200 m). Pahalgam is the headquarters of one of the eleven tehsils of Anantnag district.

Pahalgam is associated with the annual pilgrimage to the shrine Amarnath Yatra. Chandanwari, located 16 kilometres (9.9 mi) from Pahalgam. The town is the starting point of the yatra that takes place every year in the months of July–August, receiving hundreds of thousands of tourists. Because of its religious significance and role as a base camp, the town attracts 70% of visitors to the valley.[23] This flood of tourists overwhelms some of the local infrastructure, especially waste management in the town.[23]
Sonmarg
This section is an excerpt from Sonamarg § Tourism.[edit]
Sonamarg provides glaciers like kalahoi Peak & trekking routes leading to Vishansar Lake, Krishansar Lake, Gangabal Lake and Gadsar Lake in the Himalayas, which are stocked with snowtrout and brown trout.[24] The Sind River meanders here and abounds with trout and mahseer. Ponies can be hired for a trip up to Thajiwas glacier, in the summer. The Yatra to the nearby Amarnath Temple begins in Sonamarg.

Baltal, 15 km east of Sonamarg, is a valley that lies at the foot of the Zoji La pass. Trekkers can also reach the city of Leh—known as "the rooftop of the world"—by crossing over the Zoji La.

The Jammu and Kashmir tourism department organizes river rafting tournaments at Sonamarg throughout the year, which has recently seen the participation of teams from abroad.[25]
Srinagar
This section is an excerpt from Srinagar § Tourism.[edit]
Srinagar is one of several places that have been called the "Venice of the East".[26][27][28] Lakes around the city include Dal Lake – noted for its houseboats – and Nigeen Lake. Apart from Dal Lake and Nigeen Lake, Wular Lake and Manasbal Lake both lie to the north of Srinagar. Wular Lake is one of the largest fresh water lakes in Asia.

Srinagar has some Mughal gardens, forming a part of those laid by the Mughal emperors across the Indian subcontinent. Those of Srinagar and its close vicinity include Chashma Shahi (the royal fountains); Pari Mahal (the palace of the fairies); Nishat Bagh (the garden of spring); Shalimar Bagh; the Naseem Bagh. Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Botanical Garden is a botanical garden in the city, set up in 1969.[29] The Indian government has included these gardens under "Mughal Gardens of Jammu and Kashmir" in the tentative list for sites to be included in world Heritage sites.

The Sher Garhi Palace houses administrative buildings from the state government.[30] Another palace of the Maharajas, the Gulab Bhavan, has now become the Lalit Grand Palace hotel.[31]

The Shankaracharya Temple lies on a hill top in the middle of the city.[32]
Indira Gandhi Memorial Tulip garden, previously Model Floriculture Center, is a tulip garden in Srinagar. It is the largest tulip garden in Asia spread over an area of about 30 hectares (74 acres). It is situated at the base of the Zabarwan range, built on a sloping ground in a terraced fashion consisting of seven terraces with an overview of the Dal Lake. The garden was opened in 2007 with the aim to boost floriculture and tourism in the Kashmir Valley. It was formerly known as Siraj Bagh. About 1.5 million tulip bulbs, all in multiple colours, were brought from Keukenhof tulip gardens of Amsterdam. Besides tulips, there are 46 varieties of flowers, including hyacinths, daffodils and ranunculus which were also brought from Holland. The tulip garden is home to around 68 varieties of tulips.The Tulip festival is an annual Spring festival to increase tourism by the Government of Jammu and Kashmir. The festival showcases a variety of flowers in the garden.


Panorama of Srinagar

Houseboats on Dal Lake
Verinag
This section is an excerpt from Verinag.[edit]

Snow-clad view of Verinag Garden
Verinag (/ˈveɪriːnɑːɡ/) is a town named after and famous for the Verinag spring and Mughal garden, near Anantnag city in the Anantnag district of the union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, India. It is also called "gateway of Kashmir" and is a notified area committee with tehsil status (Shahabad Bala Verinag) and is about 26 kilometers away from Anantnag and approximately 78 kilometres south-east from Srinagar which is the summer capital of the union territory of Jammu and Kashmir. Verinag is also the first tourist spot of Kashmir Valley when travelling by road from Jammu, the winter capital of the union territory of Jammu and Kashmir towards Srinagar. There is an octagonal stone basin at Verinag Spring and an arcade surrounding it which were built by Mughal emperor Jahangir in 1620 A.D. Later, a beautiful garden next to this spring, was laid out by his son Shah Jahan. This spring is known to never dry up or overflow. Verinag Spring is also the major source of river Jhelum. Verinag Spring and Mughal Arcade surrounding it is officially recognized by Archaeological Survey of India as a Monument of National Importance.[33]

Verinag spring is the main source of River Jehlum, (vyeth in local Kashmiri language) which flows throughout the valley of Kashmir and finally enters into Pakistan-administered Kashmir.
Gurez
This section is an excerpt from Gurez.[edit]
Gurez, or Gurais[34] (Guráai in the local Shina language),[35] is a valley located in the high Himalayas, about 86 kilometres (53 mi) from Bandipore and 123 kilometres (76 mi) from Srinagar, to the north of the Kashmir valley. At about 2,400 metres (8,000 ft) above sea level, the valley is surrounded by snow-capped mountains. It has diverse fauna and wildlife including the Himalayan brown bear and the snow leopard. The Kishanganga River flows through the valley.[36]

The valley lies near the Line of Control, which separates it from the Astore and Neelum districts of Pakistan-administered Kashmir. Being situated very close to the Burzil Pass, which leads into Astore, the inhabitants are ethnic Dards/Shins. They speak the Shina language and have the same styles of dress and culture as their kinsmen in Pakistani-administered Gilgit-Baltistan.[37]

Dawar is the central township in the area. The population of the area is estimated to be about 30,000, and is scattered among fifteen villages. Tourism industry is emerging , hotels like Gurez knights, kaka Palace, woodvibes provide service to tourists.

Due to heavy snowfall (around 2 metres (7 ft)) and closure of Razdan Pass in winter, the valley remains cut off for six months of the year.[38]
Doodhpathri
This section is an excerpt from Doodhpathri.[edit]
Doodhpathri (translation: Valley of Milk ; Kashmiri pronunciation: [dɔdɨ patʰɨr]) is a tourist destination and a hill station located in the Khansahib tehsil of the Budgam district of Jammu and Kashmir, India.[39][40] Situated at an altitude of 2,730 metres (8,960 ft) from sea level, it is located at a distance of 42 km (26 mi) from Jammu and Kashmir's summer capital, Srinagar, and 30 km (19 mi) from district headquarters, Budgam.
Kheer Bhawani
This section is an excerpt from Kheer Bhawani Temple.[edit]
Part of a series on
Hinduism

HindusHistoryTimeline
Origins
Traditions
Deities
Concepts
Practices
Philosophical schools
Gurus, sants, philosophers
Texts
Society
Other topics
GlossaryOutline
 Hinduism portal
vte
Kheer Bhawani, Ksheer Bhawani or the Ragnya Devi temple[a] is a Hindu temple situated at a distance of 25 kilometres (16 mi) north-east of Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir, India, in the village of Tulmul[b] in Ganderbal. It is dedicated to the Hindu goddess Kheer Bhavani constructed over a sacred spring.[46][47] As is the custom with Hindu deities, the goddess has many names including Ragnya or Rajna,[c] along with variations in honorifics such as Devi, Mata or Bhagavati.[48][49] The term kheer refers to a milk and rice pudding that is offered to propitiate the goddess. Kheer Bhawani is sometimes translated as 'Milk Goddess'. The worship of Kheer Bhawani is universal among the Hindus of Kashmir, most of them who worship her as their protective patron deity Kuladevi.[50]

The sacred spring here has its own attached belief. An eponymously named mela is held annually here.[51] It is one of the largest gatherings of Hindus in the region following the Amarnath pilgrimage.[52] Maharaja Pratap Singh of Jammu and Kashmir and Maharaja Hari Singh contributed to building and renovating the temple.[53][44]

There are other temples to Kheer Bhawani in the region, such as Mata Kheer Bhawani Temple at Tikker, Kupwara.[54]


Devotee at the Temple
Major tourist attractions in Chenab Valley
Main article: List of tourist attractions in Chenab Valley
The Chenab valley is a region which refers to districts of Doda, Kishtwar, Ramban and parts of Reasi. The major tourist attractions in this region are;

Bhaderwah.
Jai Valley.
Padri Pass.
Lal Draman
Bhal Padri
Sinthan Top
Chenab Rail Bridge
Adventure tourism
Skiing
Gulmarg
Patnitop
Sanasar
Jai Valley: The Jai Valley at a height of 7000 ft. located 32 km from Bhaderwah, and 232 km (approx.) from Jammu is a region spread over 6 km receives ample snow to attract ski-lovers and snow-boarders.[citation needed]
Rafting
Sonamarg- river rafting tournaments are held by tourism department.
The Reasi- Dera Baba Banda Bahadur stretch of 12 km (approx.) houses rapids up to 3rd grade and is ideal for amateurs and joy rides.
Para-gliding
Sanasar, 19 km west of Patnitop and 130 km from Jammu.
Camping
Sanasar
Bani-Sarthal
Jai Valley
Patnitop
Rock climbing
Patnitop
Sanasar
Bhaderwah
Trekking
Udhampur
Patnitop
Kishtwar
Bhaderwah
Bani-Basholi
Sarthal valley
Sonamarg
[55]

Transport

View of Srinagar Airport
The primary methods of transport in Jammu and Kashmir are by road and air. It has access to the rest of India through the Banihal road tunnel near Qazigund through NH 1A (now known as NH 44) and through NH 1B that passes through Sinthan pass and Kishtwar.

Jammu and Kashmir has 2 civil airports. The Jammu Airport and the Srinagar Airport. They receive direct flights from New Delhi, Mumbai and Bengaluru.

Jammu and Kashmir has a 119 km (74 mi) long modern railway line that started in October 2009 and connects Baramulla in the western part of the valley to Srinagar and Qazigund. It further links the Kashmir Valley to Banihal across the Pir Panjal mountains through the new 11.215 km (6.969 mi) long Pir Panjal Railway Tunnel or through the Banihal rail tunnel. Banihal railway station will be linked to the rest of India in another few years as the construction of the railway line from Jammu to Banihal progresses steadily.

Tourism in Punjab, India

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (July 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Main article: List of Monuments of National Importance in Punjab

The Harmandir Sahib in Amritsar is the holiest site in Sikhism, and one of the most visited tourist attractions in India.

Virasat-e-Khalsa in Anandpur Sahib
The state of Punjab is renowned for its cuisine, culture and history. Punjab has a vast public transportation and communication network.

Punjab receives many religious tourists, as the state is home to some of the holiest places in Sikhism, including the Harmandir Sahib[1] and three of the five Panj Takht.

Gobindgarh Fort
Main article: Gobindgarh Fort

Gobindgarh Fort museum

fort entrance

Koh-i-Noor at fort
Gobindgarh Fort of Maharaja Ranjit Singh at Amritsar is developed as a museum and theme park, as a repository of History of Punjab. It has showcase of Zamzama cannon and Koh-i-Noor diamond replica alongside programs of Whispering Walls Laser show, 7D show and night cultural shows.[2][3][4]

Khatkar Kalan
Main article: Khatkar Kalan
Khatkar Kalan is a village between Banga and Nawanshar towns in Shahid Bhagat Singh Nagar district in the Indian state of Punjab. This is the ancestral place of S.Bhagat Singh, the a well known freedom fighter of India. The district is named after his name, Shaheed Bhagat Singh Nagar.[5][6]

Neighboring villages sharing a boundary with Katkar Kalan are Thandian, Dosanjh Khurd, Manguwal, Karnana, Kahma, Bhootan, Bhukhari and the town of Banga.

Durgiana Temple
Main article: Durgiana Temple
The Durgiana Temple, Durga Tirath and Sitla Mandir, is a main Hindu temple of Punjab (India) situated in the city of Amritsar.[7] Though a Hindu temple, its architecture is similar to the Golden Temple of Sikh religion.[8] It is named after name of the Goddess Durga, the chief Goddess deified and worshipped here.

Harike wetland
Main article: Harike Wetland

Bird at Harike Wetlands
Harike bird sanctuary also known as Hari-ke-Pattan is wetland where lakhs of birds arrive from Siberia, Russia, Kazakhstan and other low temperature regions start arriving at the from mid-October up to December and stay here till March.[9][10]

Jallianwala Bagh
Jallianwala Bagh is a garden suited In City Amritsar of Punjab. This monument signifies the nation. It was established in 1951. Jallianwala bagh is well known due to the massacre happened in this monument. Jallianwala Bagh Massacre occur on April 13, 1919, in which thousands of Indians died as General Dyer ordered their army to fire on the innocent Indians.[11]

See also
Tourism in Amritsar
List of fairs and festivals in Punjab, India
References
 Polgreen, Lydia (29 August 2010). "A Sikh Temple Where All May Eat, and Pitch In". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 29 July 2019.
 "Yahoo Search - Web Search".
 "Revisiting projects: Bricks of Gobindgarh Fort start pouring out history". 19 February 2017.
 "Gobindgarh Fort phase-I inaugurated".
 Singh, Bhagat; Hooja, Bhupendra (2007), The Jail Notebook and Other Writings, LeftWord Books, pp. 12–13, ISBN 978-81-87496-72-4
 Gaur, I.D. (2008), Martyr as Bridegroom, Anthem Press, pp. 53–55, ISBN 978-1-84331-348-9
 Discover Punjab. Parminder Singh Grover. pp. 28–29. GGKEY:LDGC4W6XWEX.
 "Durgiana Temple (Lakshmi Narain Temple)". National Informatics center.
 "26% less winged guests reached Harike wetland this year". Hindustan Times. 21 January 2020. Retrieved 2 August 2020.
 Sharma, Anil (5 January 2020). "Tourism project at Harike sanctuary: Tree houses, eateries to make wetland tourists' delight". Hindustan Times. Retrieved 2 August 2020.
 "Jallianwala Bagh Amritsar - The Complete Guide | City Amritsar". Holy City Amritsar. 14 July 2019. Retrieved 19 September 2019.
External links

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Punjab (India).
Punjab Tourism
Category: Tourism in Punjab, India
This page was last edited on 25 July 2023, at 19:36 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

Tourism in Himachal Pradesh relates to tourism in the Indian state of Himachal Pradesh. This is popularly renowned for its Himalayan landscapes and popular hill-stations. Many outdoor activities such as rock climbing, mountain biking, paragliding, ice-skating, trekking, rafting, and heli-skiing are popular tourist attractions in Himachal Pradesh.[1]

Until the British reign, tourism in Himachal Pradesh was very limited to a few places around the hills and some spiritual destinations. The British developed hill stations during their reign one of them being Shimla which they called The Summer Capital of India. After the British rule, tourism in Himachal Pradesh was on the rise with the highest number of tourists in the mid 1980s and 1990s.[2]

Shimla, the state capital, is popular among tourists. The Kalka-Shimla Railway is a mountain railway which is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.[3] Shimla is also a famous skiing attraction in India. Other popular hill stations include Manali, Kinnuar, Kasol, Parvati Valley, Chamba, Kullu, Kinnar Kailesh, and Kasauli.

Dharamshala, home of the Dalai Lama, is known for its Tibetan monasteries and Buddhist temples. Many trekking expeditions also begin here.

The Ridge is a large road in Shimla which is the centre of most cultural activities of Shimla. Annadale is also a major tourist spot in Shimla with an Army Heritage Museum, a Golf Course, helipad and lush green nature.

Bir, located on the west of Joginder Nagar Valley, Kangra district, is the Paragliding Capital of India,[4] attracts numerous tourists for this aerial adventure sport. As well as being known as the “Paragliding Capital of India,” Bir in Himachal Pradesh is also a well-known destination for ecotourism and a hub for spiritual studies and meditation. With its Tibetan refugee camp, Buddhist monasteries, and large stupa, Bir is renowned for its peaceful atmosphere.’ ‘Bir Billing’ is the collective name for paragliders who take off from Billing and land in Bir village.

Topography
The Himalayas are found in Himachal Pradesh. The Shivalik range and mid- Himalayas are found here. The highest peak is Reo Purgyil with a height of 6,816m in Kinnaur. Furthermore, there are some reservoirs and rivers in Himachal Pradesh which are tourist hotspots due to water port activities, sacred importance to Hindus, bird watching and have health centres around them.[2] The four major rivers in the state are Ravi, Chenab, Sutlej and Beas. The Sutlej and Beas river valleys are home to hot springs such as Tattapani, Manikaran and Vashisht Temple.[5]

Flora and fauna

Sunrise at TaniJubbar Lake
The Great Himalayan National Park is found in the Kullu districts of Himachal Pradesh.[2] It has an area of 620 sq km and ranging from an altitude of 1500 meters to 4500 meters and was created in 1984. There are various forest types found here such as Deodar, Silver Fir, Spruce, Oak and Alpine pastures.[5] In the Great Himalayan National Park, there are a variety of animals found such as Snow Leopard, Himalayan Yak, Himalayan Black Bear, Western Tragopan, Monal and Musk Deer. This National Park is a trail to many hikers and trekkers too.[2] Moreover, there are sanctuaries which are tourist spots such as Naina Devi Sanctuary in Bilaspur district with an area of 120 sq km and Gobind Sagar Sanctuary with an area of 100 sq km. There are animals such as Indian porcupine and giant flying squirrel found here. The Gobind Sagar Lake has fish species such as Mrigal, Silver carp, Katla, Mahaseer and Rohu are found here.[5] Narkanda located in at an altitude of around 8850 feet is known for its apple orchards. It is located between the river valleys of Giri and Sutlej.[6]

Fairs and festivals
There are a variety of festivals celebrated by the locals of Himachal Pradesh who worship gods and goddesses. There are over 2000 villages in Himachal Pradesh which celebrate festivals such as Kullu Dussehra, Chamba’s Minjar, Renuka ji Fair, Lohri, Halda, Phagli, Lossar and Mandi Shivratri.[2] There approximately 6000 temples in Himachal Pradesh with a known one being Bijli Mahadev. The temple is seen as a 20-meter structure built in stone which, according to locals, is known to attract lighting. They say that this is a way the Gods show their blessings.[7]

Major attractions
Shimla
Palampur
Chail
Kufri
Narkanda
Manali
Kullu
Joginder Nagar Valley
Baijnath
Rampur
Kinnaur
Sangla
Kalpa
Nako
Chitkul
Reckong Peo
Karsog
Dalhousie
Kangra Valley
Mandi
Rewalsar
Janjehli
Tattapani
Spiti valley
Kasol
Tosh
McLeod Ganj
Dharamshala
Kheerganga trek, Parvati Valley
Bir (Paragliding Capital of India[4])
Chamba
Triund
Khajjiar
Seraj valley
Thachi,panjain,banjar
In August 2020 the Himachal Pradesh Government announced that they will be running vistadome buses inside Rohtang tunnel for tourists.[8]

Kalka–Shimla Railway is a mountain railway in Himachal Pradesh.
Kalka–Shimla Railway is a mountain railway in Himachal Pradesh.
 
The Ridge, Shimla
The Ridge, Shimla
 
Skiing in Manali
Skiing in Manali
 
Rohtang Pass in Himachal Pradesh
Rohtang Pass in Himachal Pradesh
 
8th century rock cut temple at Masrur
8th century rock cut temple at Masrur
 
Chitkul is a small village at the end of Sangla valley in Kinnaur
Chitkul is a small village at the end of Sangla valley in Kinnaur
Statistics
Domestic tourists
Domestic tourism in Himachal Pradesh has seen significant fluctuations over the past few years.

Domestic tourist arrivals in Himachal(2018–2022)
Year	Arrivals
2018	87,00,000
2019	88,57,000
2020	21,63,000
2021	19,73,000
2022	86,35,000
Forign tourists
Himachal Pradesh, a state in northern India known for its scenic beauty and rich culture, attracts tourists from all over the world.

Foreign tourist arrivals in Himachal(2013–2022)
Year	Arrivals
2013	4,00,000
2014	4,00,000
2015	4,00,000
2016	4,00,000
2017	4,00,000
2018	2,00,000
2019	2,00,000
2020	41,803
2021	2,843
2022	7,032

Uttarakhand is a state in the northern part of India. It is often referred to as the "Devbhumi" (literally 'Land of the Gods') due to its religious significance and numerous Hindu temples and pilgrimage sites found throughout the state. As a result, religious tourism forms a major portion of the tourism in the state.[1][2] Uttarakhand is known for the natural environment of the Himalayas. 2019 Tourist Arrivals Domestic – 40,000,000 per/year and Foreigner – 150,000 per year.[3] Tourism business in Uttarakhand generated ₹ 23,000 crores during 2013–14.[4]

Char Dham
Badrinath Valley, along the Alaknanda River, Uttarakhand.
Badrinath Valley, along the Alaknanda River, Uttarakhand.
 
Kedarnath II
Kedarnath II
 
Gangotri temple
Gangotri temple
 
Yamunotri temple and ashram
Yamunotri temple and ashram
Uttarakhand is famous for Chota Char Dham, which means 'journey to four centers'. These four religious centers in Uttarakhand are represented by Badrinath (dedicated to Lord Vishnu), Kedarnath(dedicated to Lord Shiva), Gangotri (the holy origin of river Ganga) and Yamunotri (the holy origin of river Yamuna). Badrinath is part of the bigger Char Dham.

The Char Dham Yatra begins around the first to second week of May every year. These dates are announced in the national media. The base for the yatra is generally the Rishikesh town which has all the amenities available for pilgrims and tourists alike. Pilgrims and tourists generally book their journey through the local travel agents to all the four locations.

Badrinath
Badrinath is the abode of Lord Vishnu, who is called 'Badri Vishal', Badri the Big One. Legend has it that Badrinath was the abode of Lord Shiva, who used to reside there with his consort Parvati. It is Located in Chamoli District of Uttarakhand. Lord Vishnu happened to like the place and wished to reside there permanently, so He took the form of an infant and started crying inconsolably. Mother Parvati's heart melted and she picked up the infant Vishnu and started cradling Him. The crying of the infant, however, disturbed the meditation of Lord Shiva and unable to bear the crying He left for higher reaches of the Himalayas and made Kedarnath His home. Once Lord Shiva left, Mother Parvati too followed, which gave an opportunity to Lord Vishnu to take His original form and remain at Badrinath forever. The priests of Badrinath are from the southernmost part of India, i.e. Kerala. This is according to the rules laid down by Adi Shankara. Badrinath remains out of bounds for pilgrims for 6 months a year, from October to May.

Kedarnath
Kedarnath is the abode of Lord Shiva. Kedarnath is one of the 12 Jyotirlingams of India and the only one in the Uttarakhand. While there is a motorable road to Badrinath, Kedarnath could only be reached by foot. The 18 km trek begins from Gaurikund. After the 2013 Himalayan floods, the trek currently is of more than 18 km due to washing away of trekking paths.

Gangotri
Gangotri is the origin of the holy Ganga. Ganga is revered as a mother throughout India. According to the Hindu philosophy, a place considered extremely holy if a river running through it flows in the northern direction. Gangotri is a place which is not only the origin of Ganga but also where Ganga flows in a northerly direction, hence the name Gangotri. The river Ganga flows out from the melting Gangotri glacier, which is at a distance of around 18 km from the Gangotri town. Close to the temple is Bhagirath Shila, which according to the Hindu philosophy is the place where Bhagirath did penance for 5500 years to seek the blessings of Mother Ganga and requested her to descend to the Earth from her heavenly abode to cleanse the sins of his ancestors.

Yamunotri
Yamunotri is the origin of the holy river Yamuna. A temple dedicated to the holy river Yamuna is situated at the place. The actual origin of the river is the Yamunotri glacier further up into the Himalayas where very few pilgrims go due to the difficulty it entails.

Panch Kedar

Kedarnath

Tungnath

Rudranath

Madhyamaheshwar

Kalpeshwar
vte
Map all coordinates using OpenStreetMap
Download coordinates as:

Lakes of Kumaon Hills
Main article: Lakes of Kumaon hills
Nainital
Nainital
 
Bhimtal
Bhimtal
 
Naukuchiatal
Naukuchiatal
 
Sattal
Sattal
The Kumaon region of uttarakhand is home to several freshwater lakes. Most of these lakes are situated in Nainital district, due to which, Nainital is also known as the Lake district of India,[5] and four of them – Nainital, Bhimtal, Naukuchiatal and Sattal (which is a collection of seven different lakes viz Purna Tal, Ram Tal, Sita Tal, Laxman Tal, Nal Damayanti Tal, Sukha Tal and Garud Tal) are under restoration with funds provided by the National Lake Conservation Plan (NLCP) of the Government of India.[6] Other prominent lakes in the region include Khurpatal, Sariyatal, Malwatal and Kamaltal.

Other attractions
Rishikesh

Rishikesh view and 13 stories Shiva temple across Lakshman Jhula bridge over the Ganges.
Rishikesh has been a magnet for spiritual seekers since the late 60's when The Beatles rocked up Maharishi Mahesh Yogi's ashram. Known as the 'Yoga Capital of the World' because of the large number of ashrams teaching meditation and yoga. The northern part of the main town is the hotspot for all the action where the Ganges forested hills form a conducive environment for all the meditation. The evening aarti also draws a lot of crowd.[7]

Rishikesh also draws a lot of adventure sports lovers for Rafting,[8] Bungee Jumping[9] and Camping[10] adventures on the banks of River Ganges.

Haridwar
Haridwar is an important city in the religious architecture of the country. The large number of people gathering on the bathing ghats on the holy Ganges river gives the place a chaotic feel. There are a number of Hindu temples, ashrams and dharamshalas (pilgrims' rest houses) in the city. The city also serves as the entry point to the nearby Rajaji National Park.[11][12]


Panoramic view of Har ki Pauri, Haridwar.
Tehri Dam
With a height of 260.5 m (855 ft) Tehri Dam is the tallest dam in India. It is currently ranked No 10 on the List of Tallest Dams in the world. With a total planned installed capacity of 2400 MW, it's the biggest Hydroelectric power plant in India on the Bhagirathi River in New Tehri, Tehri Garhwal district.

National Parks and Bio Reserves
See also: Category:National parks in Uttarakhand
Uttarakhand is home to the Jim Corbett National Park, the first national park in India.[13] This park attracts about 500,000 tourists every year(in 1999). There are 12 National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries covering 13.8 percent of the total area of the state.[14] Nanda Devi Biosphere reserve and Valley of Flowers National Park are UNESCO World Heritage sites.[15]

Also, people visit Jim Corbett in large numbers for Jeep and Canter Safari.[16]

Hill Stations
Mussoorie
Mussoorie, also known as the Queen of Hills, is one of the most popular hill stations in the country.[17] This tourist destination, located 35 km from Dehradun, is known for its beautiful views of the Himalayan ranges. Being situated at an altitude of about 2,005 meters (6,578 ft) above sea level, the climate here is cool and temperate. Mussoorie is also known for its major tourist spots, such as the Mall Road, Lal Tibba, Picture Palace, Library Chowk, Jari Pani and George Everest, surrounded by colonial-era bungalows and churches.

Dhanaulti
Dhanaulti, about 35 km from Mussoorie, is a hill station in the Tehri Garhwal district of Uttarakhand. It is situated in the Himalayan mountain range at an altitude of about 2,250 meters above sea level and is known for its beautiful views and lush green forests of deodar.[18] Dhanaulti is a popular destination for adventure activities like trekking, camping, and ziplining. The city is also known for its ecotourism initiatives, such as the Surkanda Devi Temple and the Dhanaulti Adventure Park.

Auli
Auli is a hill station and ski Destination located in the Chamoli district of Uttarakhand. It is situated in the Himalayan mountain range at an altitude of about 2,909 meters above sea level. It is known for its snow-capped slopes and beautiful views of the surrounding peaks. Auli is located at a distance of about 10 km from Joshimath, which serves as the base town for Auli. Auli is also a popular base for trekking, skiing, camping and other outdoor activities in the surrounding area.

Nainital
Known as the "City of Lakes," Nainital is a picturesque hill station situated at an altitude of about 2,084 meters above sea level and the foothills of the Kumaon Range.[19] The main attractions of Nainital city are situated around the natural freshwater lake named Naini Lake. The lake is surrounded by hills and pine forests and is a popular spot for boating and other water sports. This hill station is known for its Mall Road, a popular shopping and dining area. Nainital attracts tourists with its many colonial-era bungalows and churches, home to a cool, temperate climate.

Chakrata
Chakrata is a hill station and cantonment located in the Dehradun district of Uttarakhand. It is situated in the Himalayan mountain range at an altitude of about 2,118 meters above sea level and is known for its beautiful views and lush green forests. Located about 100 km from the capital Dehradun, this place is ideal for trekking, camping and other outdoor activities. The city is also home to Tiger Falls, which attracts many tourists. Chakrata is known for its salubrious climate and is a popular weekend getaway for people living in nearby cities.

Munsiyari
Munsiyari is a unique hill village situated amidst the snowy ranges of Pithoragarh district, which remains covered with snow most of the time.[20] It is situated in the Himalayan mountain range at an altitude of about 2,200 meters above sea level and is known for its beautiful scenery and lush green forests. The city is also known for its local cuisine and handicrafts. The climate of Munsiyari is cool and temperate, the atmosphere here drenches everyone who comes.

Fairs and festivals

Pilgrims gather for the third Shahi Snan ("royal bath") at Har ki Pauri in Haridwar, Uttarakhand on 14 April 2010 during Haridwar Kumbh Mela.
Haridwar Kumbh Mela (fair) is a major tourist attraction to the state. Haridwar is one of the four places in India where this takes place. Haridwar also has its big annual fair in the form of Magh Mela in January–February which turns into a bigger event every 6 years in the form of Ardh Magh Mela. Nanda Devi Mela and Nanda Devi Raj Yatra are great festivals of Uttarakhand, famous in all northern India. Nanda Devi Mela and Raj Yatra are the festivals of the goddess Nanda Devi, the bless-giving goddess.[11] Kumaoni Holi a regional variant of the Hindu festival of Holi is also very well known.

Panch Prayag
Panch Prayag

Devprayag

Rudraprayag

Karnaprayag

Nandaprayag

Vishnuprayag
vte
Panch Prayag (Sanskrit: पंच-प्रयाग) is an expression in Hindu religious ethos, specifically used to connote the five sacred river confluences in the Garhwal Himalayas in the state of Uttarakhand, India. The five prayags – prayag meaning "confluence" in Sanskrit – also termed as "Prayag pentad", namely the five river confluences, are Vishnu Prayag, Nand Prayag, Karn prayag, Rudra Prayag and Dev Prayag, in the descending flow sequence of their occurrence.

Vishnu Prayag
The Alaknanda River, which originates in the eastern slopes of glacier fields of Chaukhamba, is joined by the Saraswathi River near Mana (that originates on the south from the international border), and then flows in front of the Badrinath temple, one of the most revered Hindu shrines. It then meets the Dhauli Ganges River, whose origin is from the Niti Pass, after traveling a distance of 25 km (15.5 mi) from its source to form the Vishnu Prayag (30°33′45″N 79°34′31″E). This stretch of the Alaknanda River is called the Vishnu Ganges. Legend narrates the worship offered by sage Narada to god Vishnu at this confluence. An octagonal shaped temple – located near the confluence – dated to 1889, is credited to Maharani of Indore – Ahalyabai. Though originally built to install a Shiva linga, it now houses a Vishnu image. A stairway from this temple leads to the Vishnu kund (kund means pool of water or lake) at the confluence, which is seen in a tranquil state.[21][22]

Nanda Prayag
Nand Prayag (30°19′56″N 79°18′55″E) is the second prayag in the cascade sequence of the confluences where the Nandakini River joins the main Alaknanda River. According to one tale, a noble King Nanda performed Yagnya (fire-sacrifice) and sought blessings of God. Hence, the confluence is named after him. The other version of the legend states that the confluence derives its name from the Yadava king Nanda, the foster-father of god Krishna. According to the legend, Vishnu granted a boon of the birth of a son to Nanda and his wife Yashoda and also the same boon to Devaki, wife of Vasudeva. Placed in a dilemma, since both were his disciples, he ensured that Krishna, an incarnation of Vishnu, was born to Devaki and Vasudeva but was fostered by Yashoda and Nanda.[21][22] There is temple for Gopal, a form of Krishna, here.[23] The legends also narrate that sage Kanva did penance here and also that wedding of King Dushyanta and Shakuntala took place at this venue.[24]

Karna Prayag
Karn Prayag (30°15′49″N 79°12′56″E) is the location where Alaknanda River is joined by the Pindar River that originates from the Pindar glacier, below the Nanda Devi hill range.[21] The epic Mahabharata legend narrates that Karna did penance here and earned the protective gear of Kavacha (armour) and Kundala (ear rings) from his father, the Sun god, which gave him indestructible powers. The name of the confluence is thus derived from the name of Karna.[citation needed] There is reference to this site in Meghaduta, a Sanskrit lyrical poetic drama written by the legendary poet Kalidasa, which attributes that Satopanth and Bhagirath glaciers joined here to form the Pindar River. Another classic work by the same author called the Abhijnana-shakuntala also mentions that Shakuntala and king Dushyanta's romantic daliance occurred here.[25] It is also mentioned that Swami Vivekananda mediatated here for eighteen days.[22]

The stone seat where Karna did penance is also seen here. A temple built in recent times to commemorate Karna has the deity of goddess Uma Devi (daughter of the Himalayas) here. The stone temple was rebuilt by guru Adi Shankaracharya. In the sanctum, the images of goddess Parvati, her consort Shiva and her elephant-headed son Ganesha are installed, next to that of Uma Devi, apart from Karna's image. A steep row of steps from the temple along a spur leads to the confluence point. And, down these steps, small shrines of Shiva and the Binayak Shila (the Ganesha stone) – that is believed to provide protection from danger – are located. Once in 12 years, a procession of the image of Uma Devi is taken around a few villages in the sub-divisional town of Karnaprayag.[citation needed]

Rudra Prayag
At Rudra Prayag (30°17′16″N 78°58′43″E) the Alaknanda meets the Mandakini River. The confluence is named after god Shiva, who is also known as Rudra.[citation needed] According to a widely narrated legend, Shiva performed the Tandava here, Tandava is a vigorous dance that is the source of the cycle of creation, preservation, and dissolution. Shiva also played his favourite musical instrument the Rudra veena here. By playing the Veena, he enticed god Vishnu to his presence and converted him to water.[22]

Another legend narrates that sage Narada had become conceited by his Veena playing skills. The gods requested Krishna in order to set things right. Krishna told Narada that Shiva and his consort Parvati were impressed by his musical talent. Narada was taken in by the praise and immediately set out to meet Shiva in the Himalayas. On the way at Rudra Prayag, he met several beautiful damsels called raginis (musical notes) who were disfigured and the reason for such disfigurement was squarely attributed to Narada playing his Veena. Hearing this, Narada felt humbled and surrendered before Shiva and decided to devote himself to learning music as disciple of Shiva.[citation needed]

According to another legend, the consort of Shiva – Sati was reborn as Parvati as the daughter of Himalaya, after she self-immolated herself in protest of the insult of Shiva. In spite of Himalaya's protests, Parvati performed rigorous penance to get the boon of becoming Shiva's wife in the new birth too.[citation needed]

Temples dedicated to Rudranath (Shiva) and goddess Chamunda are located here.

Dev Prayag
Dev Prayag (30°08′43″N 78°35′52″E) is the confluence of the two holy rivers, the Bhagirathi – the chief stream of the Ganges and the Alaknanda. It is the first Prayag on the way to Badrinath. Beyond this confluence, the river is known as Ganges. The holiness of this place is considered equal to the famous Triveni sangam confluence at Allahabad where the Ganges, Yamuna and Saraswati rivers merge.[22]

The confluence of the Bhagirathi, which flows in rapids with strong currents meets a much calmer river in the Alaknanda and this has been vividly described by the British captain Raper as:[26]

The contrast between the two rivers joining here is striking. The Bhaghirathi runs down a steep declivity with rapid force, roaring and foaming flowing over large fragments placed in its bed, while the placid, Alakananda, flowing, with a smooth, unruffled surface, gently winds round the point till, meeting with her turbulent consort, she is forcibly hurried down, and unites her clamours with the blustering current.

Panch Kedar
Panch Kedar (Sanskrit: पंचकेदार) refers to five Hindu temples or holy places of the Shaivite sect dedicated to god Shiva. They are located in the Garhwal Himalayan region in Uttarakhand, India. They are the subject of many legends that directly link their creation to Pandavas, the heroes of the Hindu epic Mahabharata.[27]

The five temples designated in the strict pecking order to be followed for pilgrimage for worship are the Kedarnath (Sanskrit: केदारनाथ) at an altitude of 3,583 m (11,755 ft), the Tungnath (तुंगनाथ)(3,680 m or 12,070 ft), Rudranath (रुद्रनाथ) (2,286 m or 7,500 ft), Madhyamaheshwar (मध्यमहेश्वर) or Madmaheshwar (3,490 m or 11,450 ft) and Kalpeshwar (कल्पेश्वर) (2,200 m or 7,200 ft). The Kedarnath is the main temple, which is part of the four famous Chota Char Dhams (literally 'the small four abodes/seats') or pilgrimage centers of the Garhwal Himalayas; the other three dhams are the Badrinath, Yamunotri and Gangotri. Kedarnath is also one of the twelve Jyotirlingas.[28][29]

The Garhwal region is also called the Kedar-Khanda after Kedar – the local name for Lord Shiva. The region abounds in emblems and aniconic forms of Shiva sect of Lord Shiva, much more than the Vaishnava sect. The western part of this region in particular, which constitutes half of Chamoli district being known as Kedar-Kshetra or Kedar mandala, encompasses in its ambit all the five temples constituting the Panch Kedar.[30]

Legend of Panch Kedar
The most famous folk legend about Panch Kedar relates to the Pandavas, the heroes of the Hindu epic Mahabharata. The Pandavas defeated and killed their cousins – the Kauravas in the epic Kurukshetra war. They wished to atone for the sins of committing fratricide (gotra hatya) and Brāhmanahatya (killing of Brahmins – the priest class) during the war. Thus, they handed over the reins of their kingdom to their kin and left in search of the god Shiva and to seek his blessings. First, they went to the holy city of Varanasi (Kashi), believed to Shiva's favourite city and famous for its Shiva temple. But, Shiva wanted to avoid them as he was deeply incensed by the death and dishonesty at the Kurukshetra war and was, therefore, insensitive to Pandavas' prayers. Therefore, he assumed the form of a bull (Nandi) and hid in the Garhwal region.

Not finding Shiva in Varanasi, the Pandavas went to Garhwal Himalayas. Bhima, the second of the five Pandava brothers, then standing astride two mountains started to look for Shiva. He saw a bull grazing near Guptakashi ("hidden Kashi" – the name derived from the hiding act of Shiva). Bhima immediately recognized the bull to be Shiva. Bhima caught hold of the bull by its tail and hind legs. But the bull-formed Shiva disappeared into the ground to later reappear in parts, with the hump raising in Kedarnath, the arms appearing in Tunganath, the nabhi (navel) and stomach surfacing in Madhyamaheshwar, the face showing up at Rudranath and the hair and the head appearing in Kalpeshwar. The Pandavas pleased with this reappearance in five different forms, built temples at the five places for venerating and worshipping Shiva. The Pandavas were thus freed from their sins. It is also believed that the fore portions of Shiva appeared at Pashupatinath, Kathmandu – the capital of Nepal.[28][31][32]

A variant of the tale credits Bhima of not only catching the bull, but also stopping it from disappearing. Consequently, the bull was torn asunder into five parts and appeared at five locations in the Kedar Khand of Garhwal region of the Himalayas.[31] After building the Panch Kedar temples, the Pandavas mediated at Kedarnath for salvation, performed yagna (fire sacrifice) and then through the heavenly path called the Mahapanth (also called Swargarohini), attained heaven or salvation.[citation needed]

After completing the pilgrimage of Lord Shiva's darshan at the Panch Kedar temples, it is an unwritten religious rite to visit Lord Vishnu at the Badrinath Temple, as a final affirmatory proof by the devotee that he has sought blessings of Lord Shiva.[33]

Delhi (Hindi: दिल्ली Dillī, Punjabi: ਦਿੱਲੀ Dilī, Urdu: دلّی Dillī) is India's capital and seat of government. It forms the National Capital Territory of Delhi, rather than being part of a state. Delhi is one of India's largest cities, and the core of one of the largest metropolitan areas in the world, with over 28½ million inhabitants (2018). Within India it is a major centre of arts, commerce, education, tourism, and transit. As the capital of several empires over the last 2000 years, Delhi also contains a striking array of well-preserved historic sites for tourists to visit.

Districts
Delhi is officially divided into 11 districts. For travel purposes, some government districts are combined into bigger districts in this guide. The colours of the districts represent the colour of the main metro line that travels through them:




Delhi regions - Color-coded map — switch to interactive map
 	Central Delhi
Contains the historic core of Delhi, also known as Old Delhi, with major tourist attractions such as the Red Fort and the Jama Masjid. Delhi Junction railway station is here. The red metro line runs east-west here, and the yellow line runs north-south.
 	Eastern Delhi
The part of Delhi east of the Yamuna River. The most famous attraction is the Akshardham Temple.
 	New Delhi
The British-built capital of India. Characterised by wide boulevards, roundabouts (traffic circles), colonial mansions, and government buildings dotted with monuments from various parts of India's history. Connaught Place (Rajiv Chowk) and Khan Market are popular shopping centres, and the nearby Paharganj area has many inexpensive hotels. New Delhi and Nizamuddin railway stations and a number of metro stations are here.
 	South Delhi
Contains a number of upmarket neighbourhoods, many hotels and guest houses, shopping malls and markets, and restaurants. Major attractions include the Qutub Minar. The area is served by the yellow metro line.
 	South East Delhi
Generally a high-income district similar to South Delhi. In addition, the current district borders of South East Delhi include a number of important sites near the city centre, such as Humayun's Tomb and Purana Qila. The area is served by the purple metro line.
 	Western Delhi
Home to many of Delhi's markets and fairs.
Understand
Travellers with little experience of visiting developing megacities will find Delhi to be chaotic, crowded and for much of the year, polluted. Air pollution is a major problem in Delhi since the 1980s, with much of the day dominated with a very unhealthy amount of particles. During the late spring and early summer months, the city is scorchingly hot. Dig a little deeper however and you will get a glimpse of order beneath the chaos as well as India's traditional and modern cultural richness flourishing side by side. First-time visitors feeling the culture shock are recommended to not compound that by visiting during adverse weather conditions, and get a decent hotel room so you can stay in comfort between your sightseeing trips.

History

Early settlements in Delhi
With evidence of continuous settlement dating back to the 6th century BC, Delhi is one of the oldest inhabited cities in the world. Thought to have been built and destroyed eleven times, evidence of at least eight distinct settlements can still be seen in Delhi. The most well-preserved historic sites are from the periods of Muslim and British rule, between 1193 and 1947.

The legendary city of Indraprastha from the epic Mahabharata is said to have been situated where Delhi now lies, but no remains of it have been found.

From the 10th to 14th century, the city was centred in what is now South Delhi:

1 Surajkund — Built in the 9th-10th century on what is now the far southern outskirts of Delhi. A large water reservoir can be seen, well preserved.
2 Qila Rai Pithora — Founded in perhaps the 11th century as a city named "Lalkot" under Hindu rule, in the current Mehrauli area. In around 1180, Hindu ruler Prithviraj Chauhan expanded this city and renamed it Qila Rai Pithora. Some of the ruins of the fort ramparts from this period are still visible around Qutb Minar and Mehrauli.
3 Mehrauli — Shortly afterwards, in 1192, Muslim leader Muhammad Ghori defeated Prithviraj Chauhan in battle. Ghori left his slave Qutb-ud-din Aibak as his viceroy, who in turn captured Delhi the subsequent year. After Ghori's death in 1206, Qutub-ud-din proclaimed himself the ruler of Delhi and founded what is known as the Slave Dynasty of the Delhi Sultanate. Qutub-ud-din contributed significantly in terms of architecture by building Mehrauli. His most prominent contribution is the starting of Qutb Minar (which was finally completed in 1220). The tombs and other buildings near the Qutb Minar also date to this period.
4 Siri — The Slave Dynasty was followed by the Khilji (or Khalji) dynasty. In 1303 they established Siri, first as a military camp to protect against possible Mongol invasion, and later as a fortified city. Nowadays Hauz Khas complex (north of Mehrauli) contains ruins of Siri Fort, a madrassa, and other buildings from the period.
5 Tughlaqabad — After the Khiljis there was chaos until Ghiyasuddin Tughluq (a Turk governor) invaded Delhi in the 1320s, started the Tughlaq dynasty, and founded a new capital Tughlaqabad, in South East Delhi. His son Muhammad Bin Tughluq created another city called Jahapanah in the area between Siri and Qila Rai Pithora, uniting them into one city. Tughlaqabad continued, however, to be the main capital city.

Purana Qila - ruins of Shergarh
Starting in the 14th century, new areas were built further north, near the current city centre:

6 Firozabad (Feroz Shah Kotla) — built by Muhammad bin Tughlaq's son, Feroz, in 1354. There still are some ruins which are visible around the Feroz Shah cricket stadium in Central Delhi, near the river. The city was an enclosed large area and contained many palaces, mosques, pillared halls, and a multi-floored water reservoir. Firoze also erected a 1500-year-old Ashokan Pillar (previously erected in Meerut by Samrat Ashok) on top of the palace. Firoze was buried inside a lofty tomb in Hauz Khas. After his death, the sultanate became unstable and weak, and Delhi was conquered and sacked by Tamerlane. The Sayyid and Lodhi dynasties who ruled Delhi after the Tughlaqs did less building, and the only relevant architecture visible from this period are the tombs at Lodhi Gardens. The last of the Lodhis was defeated by Babur, who then proceeded to establish the Mughal Empire in 1526.

Delhi Gate at the Red Fort
7 Shergarh — In 1533, Babur's son Humayun built the new city of Dinpanah, near the river south of Firozabad. In 1540 Humayun was defeated by Sher Shah Suri and forced to withdraw from Delhi. Sher Shah Suri established the new city Shergarh on the ruins of Dinpanah. Shergarh is what you see at Purana Qila today, near the Delhi Zoo. Humayun later reconquered Delhi and returned to power. He then completed the construction and proceeded to rule from Shergarh.
8 Shahjahanabad (Old Delhi) — the following emperors moved away from Delhi and made Agra their capital. Shahjahan (Humayun's great-grandson) returned to Delhi and established Shahjahanabad, including the Jama Masjid and the Red Fort. Much of the city wall, and three of its six gates, still exist today.
9 New Delhi — New Delhi was established in 1911 after the British decided to move India's capital from Calcutta. It is a planned city, designed by architect Sir Edwin Lutyens.
Demographics
Not all descendants of the builders of Delhi's many Muslim monuments live in Delhi. Many of them migrated to Pakistan during the Partition, with the community in Old Delhi that is keeping old courtly traditions alive smaller than it once was. The city is rich in monuments, including 174 ASI protected monuments.

The population of Delhi is a heterogeneous mix of people originally belonging to different parts of North India and beyond. Among the prominent North Indian communities are the Punjabis. Delhi also has a prominent South Indian Community, primarily in neighbourhoods like Karol Bagh, RK Puram, Mayur Vihar and Munirka. A Bengali settlement, the Chittaranjan Park in South Delhi, is the Mini Kolkata of Delhi. Quality education also draws students from different states, making up one of the most diverse student populations in the country.

Orientation
Like the rest of the Gangetic Plains, Delhi is relatively flat. The only geographical features of any significance are the river Yamuna, which flows down the eastern side of the city, and the Delhi Ridge which form a wide but low arc across the west. On the west bank is the crowded and congested Old (Central) Delhi and, to the southwest, the broad, tree-lined avenues of New Delhi, built by the British to rule their Raj. The rest is an endless low-rise sprawl of suburbia and slums, with South Delhi generally wealthier.

Climate
Delhi
Climate chart (explanation)
J	F	M	A	M	J	J	A	S	O	N	D
  19  218	
  20  2410	
  15  2915	
  21  3622	
  25  3926	
  70  3928	
  237  3527	
  235  3426	
  113  3425	
  17  3320	
  9  2813	
  9  239
Average max. and min. temperatures in °C
Precipitation+Snow totals in mm
Source: w:Delhi#Climate
Imperial conversion
The climate in Delhi goes through five distinct seasons. Winter, from December to January, is cold (the temperature drops to near freezing at night though the days are warm) and is notorious for the thick layer of smog that hangs over the city, resulting not only in cancelled flights and delayed trains, but also warnings to stay indoors and wear high-quality masks if you need to venture out. Spring, in the months of February and March, is pleasant with warm days and cool evenings. Summer, in April and May, is uncomfortably hot with temperatures soaring as high as 45 °C. Temperatures moderate during the monsoon season (June to September), but it is humid. Autumn, from October to November, brings warm days with relatively cool nights.

Read
Delhi – India Charming Chaos by Johnny Fincioen. This book concentrates on today's power centre of New Delhi and its historical context. The text and the 117 original pictures offer the reader a holistic view of the way of life in the capital of India.
Kultar's mime : stories of Sikh children who survived the 1984 Delhi massacre, Sarbpreet Singh's book on the 1984 genocide against Sikhs by anti-Sikh mobs. (ISBN 9781523834136)
When a tree shook Delhi : the 1984 carnage and its aftermath, Manoj Mitta; a book on the 1984 anti-Sikh riots. (ISBN 9788174366191)
Tibetans in Delhi, by S. Khurana, about refugees from Tibet living in Delhi. (ISBN 9781542954198)
Delirious Delhi, Dave Prager; a portrait of Delhi by an expat resident. (ISBN 1611458323)
Talk
The native language of the Delhi area is Hindi, which also happens to be the main official language of the Union Government. Hindi is spoken by almost all locals, quite often with Bihari and Punjabi accents. Most educated people are also fluent in English, and many shopkeepers and taxi drivers have a functional command of English. Punjabi and Urdu are also the official languages of Delhi, both of which are widely spoken/understood by the locals. The Hindi spoken in Delhi is quite Persianized, similar to the Hindi spoken in Western Uttar Pradesh, and much less Sanskritized than the Hindi spoken in Madhya Pradesh. Signage is usually bilingual in Hindi and English, and some road signs (especially in South and Central Delhi) are in Hindi, English, Punjabi and Urdu. Announcements on the metro are in Hindi (male voice) and English (female voice). Unlike other major cities, locals are not multilingual, and local tour guides do not speak other Indian languages. Though people from all over India live in Delhi, finding a person who can speak other Indian languages is not so easy.

Get in
See also: Istanbul to New Delhi overland
By plane
1Indira Gandhi International Airport (DEL IATA, sometimes abbreviated as IGI), New Delhi. The arrival point for many visitors into Delhi. There are several security checkpoints in the airport and you may have to show your boarding pass and passport a dozen times before boarding the plane. When leaving Delhi from the international terminal, arrive three hours before the time of departure. For domestic flights, two hours should suffice, depending on whether or not you must wait in the queues to check luggage. While sometimes time-consuming, the process is smooth, and the new terminal's shops and restaurants are sensibly located at the gate area, not before security. However, if you wish to change Indian rupees back into foreign currency, you must do this before clearing security. Indira Gandhi International Airport (Q821275) on Wikidata Indira Gandhi International Airport on Wikipedia (updated Sep 2022 | edit)
2 Hindon Airport (HDX IATA), Ghaziabad. Serves some regional flights as a civil enclave inside an air base. It is planned to stay open until further expansion at IGI is completed. Hindon Airport (Q12693010) on Wikidata Hindon Airport on Wikipedia (updated Sep 2022 | edit)
Due to massive growth in air travel, a new airport is being built at Jewar, near Noida.

By bus
Buses arrive from Kathmandu and Chitwan in Nepal (36 hr+) and virtually every city in India. Although not as comfortable as the trains, buses are the only choice for some destinations, mainly those in the mountains.

Delhi has three major Inter-State Bus Terminals (ISBTs) - Kashmere Gate ISBT, Sarai Kale Khan ISBT, and Anand Vihar ISBT. The Delhi Transport Corporation is the major operator, but every state also runs its own buses and there are some private operators too.

3 Kashmere Gate ISBT (Maharana Pratap) (Metro Kashmere Gate, Line 1/2), ☏ +91 11 43090100, info@dimts.in. This is "the" ISBT and the largest of the lot. Buses to points north: Punjab, Haryana, Chandigarh, Garwhal, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir and Nepal edit
4 Sarai Kale Khan ISBT (Vir Hakikat Rai) (next to Hazrat Nizamuddin railway station). Buses to points south, (Agra, Madhya Pradesh) edit
5 Anand Vihar ISBT (Swami Vivekanand) (On the east bank of Yamuna, M: Anand Vihar). Buses to points east (Lucknow, Kumaon) edit
6 Bikaner House, Pandara Rd, New Delhi (M: Central Secretariat Station). bus stop. Buses, including air-conditioned Volvo buses from Jaipur arrive at this place. For travel between Jaipur and Delhi, this bus stop is very clean, less crowded than ISBT, and easy to reach. edit
7 Majnu ka Tilla, New Aruna Nagar, (Tibetan colony, a short rickshaw ride from Metro Vidhan Sabha). Buses to Dharamsala edit
By train
See also: Rail travel in India
Once you have purchased a ticket either at the ticket office or on-line prior to the trip, all you need to do is go to the rail car labelled with your class of service purchased. You can either get on and sit in the first available seat or, for higher classes of service, they will often post a passenger list on the car when it stops. Look for your name and go to the assigned car, cabin and seat. There is never a need to get a boarding pass so if anyone comes out of the crowd to tell you that, don't listen to them; it is a scam. If you're brave, you can simply purchase a general 2nd class ticket and then get on any car where there is availability. The conductor will come by and check your tickets after the train starts moving. If you are in a higher fare class than you are ticketed for, all you have to do is simply pay the difference in fare to the conductor. The only risk here is that the train could be full and you could be stuck in the lowest fare class which can be very crowded with little room to sit.

Ticket buying: The easiest way is to book online through the IRCTC booking website. Registration requires verification of an e-mail address AND an Indian mobile phone number. If you don't have the phone, verification can be completed manually by emailing a passport scan to IRCTC — follow the online instructions carefully, and expect a response in a week or two.

Do not trust strangers who appear out of the crowd to help you; ignore them. Always ask for assistance at the enquiry counter or policemen (in khaki uniform).

Anyone who approaches you spontaneously should be completely ignored. Use one of the porters (in orange uniforms with metallic arms badges) to find your train and carry your luggage, in exchange for a tip.

Ticket office (on the road to Connaught Place with longer hours). It often has waiting times not much longer than at the tourist booking office. You will need to know the number or name of the train you want to take. edit
New Delhi railway station

Ajmeri Gate side of New Delhi railway station
8 New Delhi  NR  (NDLS) (outside Paharganj, also known as the backpacker ghetto, about 40 min-1 hr to travel from New Delhi station to Delhi Airport by car). 6AM–11PM. A tourist ticket office called the International Tourist Bureau is open during office hours upstairs of, but still within, the main New Delhi railway station (on the side away from the metro, near platform 1). Note that it is only for foreign tourists, so you must have a tourist visa (i.e. student and working visas are not acceptable). Non-resident Indians can also book their tickets through this office. Passport will be requested. Even the visa number is needed. The also accept debit/credit from Visa/Mastercard. They also accept RuPay cards (which is an Indian way of payment). To get a ticket, first go to the centre of the room and get numbers for the reservation and information desks, as well as a form to fill out. Then line up at one of the two u-shaped lines of chairs, fill out the form, and prepare for a protracted wait. When your information number is called, have the clerk check the availability of the train(s) you desire and answer any questions you have about the form. Then wait for your reservation number to be called. Note that by the time you get to the reservation desk, your train may no longer be available, in which case you can try to reserve a different one. If you need a bathroom during this lengthy process, there is a relatively clean male and female toilet just outside on the verandah through the side door (the door you didn't enter through). The station is large, crowded, confusing and packed with touts.
Allow one hour to find your train the first time you visit. Don't trust the electronic display boards, which often show incorrect information. Instead listen to the announcements and ask multiple people in uniform (policemen) until you find your train. New Delhi railway station (Q2742296) on Wikidata New Delhi railway station on Wikipedia (updated May 2023 | edit) Transport options to and from New Delhi station:

By metro: New Delhi station is served by Yellow  2  and Orange  Airport Express  lines of the Delhi Metro. Metro exits are at the Ajmeri Gate (second entrance) side near platform 16.
By taxi: Depending on traffic, a taxi fare costs you about ₹400. Pre-paid taxi booth run by Delhi Police. If you are arriving at the station, and want to take a taxi, head to the Delhi Police pre-paid taxi booth. Unfortunately, this booth is at the extreme far north end (about 50 m from the station main exit) of the taxi parking and you will encounter touts claiming to provide prepaid taxi; just ignore them and find the pre-paid taxi booth run by the Delhi Police which are safe and least expensive. There is some chance that the booth clerk, who works for the police, will shortchange you less than anyone else who handles cash in Delhi. You can also take prepaid rickshaws and taxis from the plaza outside the main entrance.
Delhi Junction
9 Delhi Junction  NR  (DLI, Old Delhi, Purani Dilli) (metro: Chandni Chowk  2 . There is an entrance just outside at the east end of the station and also just over the main road outside (last metro at about 11:30AM). If taking an auto rickshaw from here, the prepaid desk will often try and charge you as much as three times the actual price quoted on the official price guide displayed clearly in their window - bargaining is sadly often cheaper.). Delhi Junction railway station (Q3633132) on Wikidata Delhi Junction railway station on Wikipedia (updated May 2023 | edit)
Hazrat Nizamuddin
10 Hazrat Nizamuddin  NR  (NZM), Harsha Rd, Nizamuddin East, (A few kilometres to the south. Bus 261, 306 to the Sarai Kale Khan Inter State Bus Terminal (ISBT) on the ring road and then walk over to the station (400 m).). Many trains heading south. It's the least chaotic of the Big Three, but still pretty big and poorly signposted; listen to the announcements to figure out your train. The station has a pretty good food court that sells inexpensive, hygienic takeaway snacks including sandwiches and samosas. Hazrat Nizamuddin railway station (Q2723139) on Wikidata Hazrat Nizamuddin railway station on Wikipedia (updated May 2023 | edit)
Other stations
11 Anand Vihar Terminal (ANVT) (near Ghaziabad–Delhi Border; metro: Anand Vihar  3/4  7  just opposite to Anand Vihar Interstate Bus Terminal (ISBT)). Terminal of most east-bound services. Anand Vihar Terminal (Q4751289) on Wikidata Anand Vihar Terminal railway station on Wikipedia (updated May 2023 | edit)
12 Delhi Sarai Rohilla, Railway Officers Colony, (metro: Shastri Nagar  1 ; bus 71, 89). Sarai Rohilla railway station (Q3635051) on Wikidata Delhi Sarai Rohilla railway station on Wikipedia (updated May 2023 | edit)
13 Delhi Cantonment (bus 518, 545, 588 to  Delhi Cantt). Luxury tains like the Royal Orient departs from this station. Besides, a Vande Bharat Express from Ajmer terminates at Delhi Cantonment. Delhi Cantt railway station (Q16955670) on Wikidata Delhi Cantonment railway station on Wikipedia edit
By rapid rail
Rapid rails, officially known as RAPIDX, are faster than local and express trains. As of 2024, the Sahibabad–Duhai stretch of the Delhi–Meerut rapid rail is operational and you have to wait until 2026 to use rapid rail to arrive Delhi. The trains used on the rapid rails are called Namo Bharat.

Get around
Getting around Delhi is always an adventure. Traffic is, by and large, horribly congested and many drivers will think nothing of quoting ten times the going price to a tourist. Use the prices below as broad guidelines and agree on prices before setting off. The best way to travel is via metro, where there are separate cabins for women (which prove to be very useful during rush hour). Metro is clean, efficient, and typically ridden by relatively affluent middle-class students or commuters en route to/from work; there is almost nowhere in the city that you cannot get to by metro.

By metro

The modern Delhi Metro, a sign of India's economic development

Delhi Metro and rail network
The fast-growing Delhi Metro network provides a cheap, quick, hassle-free and air-conditioned way of zipping around the city. As of May 2018, the following lines are open:

Red Line  1 : Dilshad Garden–Rithala
Yellow Line  2 : Samaypur Badli–HUDA City Centre
Blue Line  3/4 : Dwarka Sector 21–Noida Electronic City
Blue Line branch: Yamuna Bank–Vaishali
Green Line  5 : Mundka–Inderlok
Green Line branch: Ashok Park Main–Kirti Nagar
Violet Line  6 : Kashmere Gate–Ballabhgarh
Orange Line  Airport Express : New Delhi–IGI Airport–Dwarka Sector 21
Pink Line  7 : Majilis Park–Shiv Vihar
Magenta Line  8 : Janakpuri West–Botanical Garden
Grey Line  9 : Dwarka–Dhansa
Fares range from ₹10-60, just buy a token, change lines as necessary, and deposit the token in the slot as you exit. Tokens can be used only from the station they are bought, so you can't buy two and use the second to return home. If you're planning on sticking around for a while, you can buy a "Smart Card" for ₹200, which is worth ₹150 and includes a ₹50 deposit; using this saves 10% and, more importantly, lets you avoid the queues. There is also a "Tourist Card" allowing unlimited use for ₹150 (1 day) or ₹300 (3 days), but it's highly unlikely that you'll travel enough to make this pay off. Special fares apply for travel on the Airport Express. During rush hour, you might have to queue up for 20min+ due to security checks, especially in the central stations.

The Yellow Line, in particular, is useful for getting to the Delhi Junction (Chandni Chowk, Jama Masjid) and New Delhi railway stations, the ISBT bus terminal, the backpacker ghetto of Paharganj, Hauz Khas and Qutb Minar. The Blue Line is also handy for visiting Akshardham, Botanical Garden and accessing the western parts of Paharganj through RK Ashram Marg station. The Magenta Line is also useful for getting to the Terminal 1 of Delhi Airport and visiting Hauz Khas, Lotus Temple, Okhla Bird Sanctuary and Botanical Garden.

Beware: Metro stations all use the new, official, Indianised names, so Connaught Place is "Rajiv Chowk", Delhi Junction is "Chandni Chowk" and ISBT is "Kashmere Gate".

The first coach in every train is reserved for women only, violating it incurs a penalty. Male passengers accompanying females are forbidden too.

Be aware that if you wish to exit at a main station during rush hour, you will have to tackle your way through in order to get out before the opposite flow of passengers push you back inside. Don't be afraid of using your strength to push yourself out.

By local train
There are limited commuter services on Delhi's railways, but the facilities are a far cry from the user-friendly Metro stations. For the most part, train stations are inconveniently located. There is no passenger service on the Delhi Ring Railway outside rush hour.

By bus

You're never alone on a bus in Delhi
All parts of Delhi are well connected by buses and with tickets ranging from ₹5-25 they are very cheap, but they are also quite crowded most of the time. The red and blue buses are air-conditioned and the green and orange ones are not. As bus stops do not have bus routes written properly, it can be difficult to find your way. Asking other people at the bus stop is often the best way to find out about bus routes to your destination. However, the buses are pretty frequent, running every 15-20 min or so on most routes. There are two kinds of buses in Delhi:

Government run DTC buses (red and green with big windows)
Privately run Blue-Line buses (orange)
If you have a choice, opt for a DTC bus. They will stop less frequently and will generally be less crowded too. Note that many buses, DTC ones too, will stop pretty much anywhere if there are enough people getting on or off.

Board buses at the back and pay the ticket seller sitting right next to the door. Be sure to hang onto your tickets, as ticket checks are fairly frequent. Some seats on the left side of the bus may be reserved for women and the handicapped. When it's time to disembark, move to the front of the bus. As you might expect, all these guidelines are regularly ignored when buses are very crowded.

Hop on Hop off

Hop on Hop off Delhi Tourism Bus
HOHO, ☏ +91 11 4094 0000 (Helpline). Delhi Tourism operates a Hop On Hop Off bus service. A fleet of air conditioned low floored buses follow a pre-defined set of stops around the city and passengers can hop off the bus, see the place at one's own convenience and hop on the next bus. The service runs on a 45 minute interval and covers important monuments, memorials, museums and shopping places in the city. Each bus is staffed with a knowledgeable English speaking guide. The ticket costs ₹ 300 and is valid for 2 consecutive days. The service does not operate on Mondays. edit
By taxi

Official Taxi
A taxi or hired car (usually with driver) is required to see many of the far-flung sites within and around Delhi. However, the metro is a far cheaper and equally comfortable option.

Most Delhi taxis are old but reliable CNG-run Ambassadors or Omnis in distinctive black-and-yellow livery and a green stripe. The hired family car of choice is usually a Toyota Innova or Chevrolet Tavera. While all are equipped with meters and should cost ₹15 for the first km ₹8.5 per km, the meters are often rigged and it's better to agree on the price in advance. Most trips around the city should be ₹200-500, while a trip to the airport would be higher, depending on starting location. An eight-hour charter should cost around ₹1,500, and a tip is expected if the driver is helpful. The prices would also depend upon the vehicle size too. Black and yellow taxis are not air-conditioned. Even if they do have air conditioning, you will be charged extra (and the rates are up to the driver, so bargain hard).

Modern radio taxi services: at ₹20/km, they're more the list price of the competition, but they use modern vehicles with air-conditioning and GPS and can be dialled 24 hr/day. The flag fare is ₹20, and the fare increases by ₹5 for every 250 m after the first km. If you need an SUV, you need to inform the company in advance, but the fare remains the same. Night charges (25% extra) apply between 11PM to 5AM. Book up to a few hours in advance. Many corporate people rely on these cabs for their daily commute and they may be booked during office hours. Tipping is not expected. After booking, you will receive an SMS with the car licence plate number, and the driver's name and mobile number. Usually the driver will call you and inform you that they have arrived. Many drivers speak English at a very basic level, so use short phrases.

You can use TaxiPixi services and avoid all the hassle. Download the app on your iPhone/Android.

Don't take non-official taxis, they might take you to wrong hotels, or to a "tourist information centre", and try to sell you overpriced things. To be on the safe side, Check that whether the driver has their official documentation or not.

Taxi rides involving tourists in Delhi almost always involve minor scams. Most of the time, the driver will demand more money than originally agreed. During the ride, prepare a sum of money that is at least the agreed fare and put in your shirt pocket or comparable spot. At the destination, get your belongings out of the car first and leave the door open to slow the driver down if he follows you. Hand the money to the driver without stupidly asking for change and then immediately walk away as quickly as you can in the direction that would be most difficult for him to follow.

By car
Delhi, The road conditions are generally better than in the rest of India. Traffic Jam is a major concern in Delhi. For travelling in Delhi, you can hire a car.



Transportation Network Taxis
Delhi is also serviced by various transportation network ("ridesharing") companies including Uber and Ola Cabs. Make sure to check the tariffs in these before you pay. While most of these services accept cash, many can also be linked to online wallet services like Paytm, so overcharging is rarely a risk.

By auto rickshaws

Auto-rickshaws - no doors
Auto rickshaws (also called three-wheeled scooters, tuk-tuks or simply autos) are good for shorter trips. Always in a distinctive yellow-and-green livery, auto rickshaws are three-wheeled partially enclosed contraptions that run on CNG and can seat three people in the back. In general, they are much cheaper than taxis and can be hailed from the street. Although by law the rickshaw drivers should charge according to the meter in their vehicle (₹25 for the first two km, ₹8/km after), this rate is unrealistically low and they will almost always try to haggle for price. Try to negotiate a price before entering the vehicle. As rules of thumb, expect even the shortest journey to cost ₹30-40/person regardless of the meter, but you should never need to pay over ₹150 for any trip within the city. If you're overquoted, don't be afraid to walk away. It's usually easy to find another one soon, usually with a driver who won't rip you off.

If you have any trouble with drivers, go to any of the numerous tourist police stations in the city centre and they will give you a complaint slip which will result in a ₹500 fine for the auto driver. There should also be a telephone number written on the vehicle to call in case of any complaint.

There are a number of "Pre-paid" auto stands run by the Police. Tell them where you want to go and pay them upfront. The charge will include ₹5 for the service. You then take the coupon and stand outside where a policeman will direct you to the next available Auto. When your journey is completed you hand the coupon to the auto driver and that's it. Nothing more to pay (despite what they may say).

By cycle rickshaws

Traffic in Old Delhi's Chawri Bazaar, facing Jama Masjid
Cycle rickshaws are three-wheeled, pedal/electric powered rickshaws with seats in the back to seat passengers and a driver in the front. They are good for short distances, or places which are too far to walk but too short for taking a bus/taxi/auto rickshaw. Cycle rickshaws don't use meters, so establish a price before getting on. ₹20-50 is reasonable for most journeys of a few km.

Cycle rickshaws are best to use in Old Delhi to visit the intricate galis (walkways) and to enjoy the smells and sounds of the city.

By electric rickshaw
Electric rickshaws, popularly known as tuk-tuk or e-rickshaws, are also used to enjoy the streets of Old Delhi. These are battery-operated alternatives to auto rickshaws and cycle rickshaws because of their low fuel cost, and less human effort compared to cycle rickshaws.

By foot
Much of Delhi is quite pedestrian-hostile. Distances are long, road signage is poor, and in the more tourist oriented areas, you'll be constantly accosted by beggars and touts. Crossing roads often involves wading across multiple lanes of heavy traffic. Try your best to move in a predictable straight line, so vehicles can weave around you. Better yet, latch onto a group of locals and cross in their shadow. If you really want to walk around, these places would be good:

Walk from Rashtrapati Bhavan (President's house) to India Gate on Kartavya Path (a walk of close to 3–4 km).
Walk from Jama Masjid to Red Fort in the Chandni Chowk area.
Far South Delhi go walk about in the forest. Try starting from south of Indian Institute of Technology through Sanjay Van to Qutub Minar. Note however that Sanjay Van is not always safe, and it is advisable to go there in a group, preferably during daylight.
South Delhi-Green Park-Hauz Khas Village, then to the Hauz Khas ruined madrasa, offers a newer shopping area, an up-market arts village, old ruins, and some quality gardens.
See
Individual listings can be found in Delhi's district articles
Delhi is known for its impressive range of structures — fortifications, mosques, and tombs — built during the centuries when Delhi was the centre of large Muslim empires. There are dozens of notable sites scattered around the city, and several of them are internationally famous as UNESCO World Heritage Sites. The most visited sites are the Red Fort (the 17th century palace of the Mughal emperor), Jama Masjid (a vast and beautiful 17th century mosque), the Qutub Minar (a 73-meter high tower, dating to the 13th century but still with well-preserved intricate carvings), Humayun's Tomb (the vast 16th century tomb of a Mughal emperor), and Purana Qila (a 16th-century Mughal citadel).

Newcomers are often confused about the relationship between Delhi and New Delhi. In fact, New Delhi, the capital of India, is actually one of the districts of Delhi. New Delhi was built in 1911–12. Being centrally planned in the modern era, it features wide boulevards, large parks, and roundabouts between its government buildings. Popular sights here are the India Gate, Kartavya Path "national mall" connecting the main government buildings, and Rashtrapati Bhavan (presidential palace). Many of the most important museums in Delhi are located here too.

Another popular attraction is the Bahá'í Lotus Temple in South East Delhi, a modern structure built with a flower-like shape. It is arguably the most visited building in the world.

Detailed listings of all sights in Delhi can be found in the district articles.

Beware

There are various private "tourist information" offices around Connaught Place openly claiming to be the official government tourist office. They're actually just travel agents that have nothing to do with the Government of India, and since they prey on tourists, anything you buy from them will be grossly overpriced compared to doing it yourself.

The staff at the Delhi tourist office is very helpful, and the office has a lot of free information:

1 The Government of India Tourist Office, 88 Janpath, Connaught Place, ☏ +91 11 2332 0005, +91 11 2332 0008, +91 11 2332 0109, +91 11 2332 0266. The Government of India Tourist Office offers daily tours, coverings all of the major Delhi sites. If you should choose to go with the government-sanctioned day tour, be aware that due to the heavy agenda, you will need to have a quick foot, only 20-40 min are given for each sight, which is next to no time. Consider this day tour as a sampler. If there is a sight of particular interest, bookmark it and return at a later date. edit
Do
Take a walk at Connaught Place (CP), the heart of New Delhi. The British-designed colonial equivalent of a shopping mall, it's laid out in two concentric rings divided into blocks, all bursting with shops and lots of pampered pigeons waddling about. Long neglected, the area received an upsurge after the opening of the major Metro junction of Rajiv Chowk under it, and it's going more upmarket by the day. At the centre is a small but pleasant park, while on one edge is the notorious Palika Bazaar, an underground den of cheap wares, many pirated or smuggled from overseas. The area is surrounded by tall office buildings on nearly all sides. Train fans will want to check out the Metro Museum inside the (Patel Chowk) station, open Tu-Su 10AM-4PM (free with valid Metro ticket).
Learn
Delhi is a key centre of learning in India. The most famous universities in Delhi are JNU, DU, IGNOU, DTU, JMI and IIT. The official website of the Delhi Government's Directorate of Education is a good starting point for learning more about study opportunities in Delhi.

Apart from undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral courses, there are many training and diploma-level institutes and polytechnics that cater to the growing demand for skill-based and vocational education. Besides conventional educational institutes, more and more foreigners also make the effort to learn Hindustani language (Hindi-Urdu) and Delhi is these languages.

Work
Delhi's economy is expanding rapidly. In analogy many interesting work opportunities emerge. Monster, Jobted and other online job platforms are a good starting point to see what kind of jobs are on offer. Traditionally foreigners often work in the social sector or in teaching. Increasingly, however, expats work for multinational companies and even local Indian companies.

There is a great variety of employment opportunities in Delhi for foreigners, whether they would like to work in business, NGOs, educational institutes, or even government. Still, there is one caveat: the labour market in Delhi is highly competitive and so at many prestigious organisations, the number of applicants far exceeds the number of positions available, which allows employers to receive highly talented applicants for rather meagre salaries (especially when compared to other international destinations).

Buy
Individual listings can be found in Delhi's district articles

Fabindia - a clothing chain store
If you're not afraid to haggle and bump elbows in bazaars, Delhi is a great place to shop. Most of the well-known bazaars are located in the most central parts of Delhi, both Central Delhi and New Delhi. Western-style malls are plentiful and are found further south - in South Delhi and South East Delhi, as well as the suburbs of Gurgaon and Noida. Many shopping districts are overcrowded on Saturdays and closed on Sundays.


Clothing
For clothing, you can go either to the bazaars or to Western-style shopping malls (mostly in the southern areas).

Computers

Nehru Place
For computers and software, the best place to look is Nehru Place IT market complex in South East Delhi, an interesting combination of modern technology products and old world marketplace sales techniques. You can find cheap hardware here as well as both original and pirated software. There are also several similar markets in other parts of Delhi, mostly in the Western districts.

Books
The Indian book industry is huge, producing annually about 15,000 books in English, and obviously far more in Hindi and other native languages. Delhi is a hub of this industry, so there are small, specialist bookstores that abound. Locally produced books can be very inexpensive and many popular Western titles are published and available here for a fraction of their original cost.

In general, good places to buy books are in Central Delhi (Daryaganj neighbourhood and the Nai Sarak Bookshop Area), plus shopping malls in the south of the city.

The Daryaganj Sunday Book Market is a flea market-book market open on Sundays from 10AM to evening, with a vast selection. Bargain for best prices.

Eat
Individual listings can be found in Delhi's district articles

Sweet jalebis are very popular in Delhi

A shop frying Parathas in ghee at the Paranthe Wali Gali in Chandni Chowk, Delhi.
Delhiites complain about many things in their city, but the food will satisfy even the most demanding gourmet. Not only can you find some of the best Indian food on the subcontinent, but there is also an increasing number of excellent (if often pricey) international restaurants offering cuisine from around the world. When ordering, do remember that Delhi is about 1,000 km from the nearest ocean, so vegetarian, chicken and mutton dishes are the way to go.

Do visit Paranthe Wali Gali in Chandni Chowk. This street has shops that make and sell solely parathas (stuffed Indian bread). These are available in all the possible flavours and stuffing you may imagine, with hundreds of varieties from bitter gourd to ice cream.

Delhi has arguably the best street food in India. However, do not eat unhygienic or open food. There are plenty of restaurants offering street food in a potentially more hygienic environment.

You can join local groups of foodies who go out regularly to sample and savour what new and old dishes the city has to offer. If you want a fully customized food tour tailored specifically for you, then Food Tour In Delhi is a good choice. The guests can explore the street food of Delhi in a fun and safe manner. Their tours cover food joints which are in business for 50 to 120 years and serve some of the best street food in the world. The tours cover winding streets of Old Delhi as well as swanky upscale markets located all over the city. The food tours are led by chefs and culinary experts with extensive experience and offer facilities such as pickup and drop, unlimited food which covers all major varieties of food available in the city. Another one of the most active groups is Food Enthusiasts of Delhi. They organize regular food walks, better known as Raids to various parts and joints in the city. It's a non-commercial group, brought together by their passion and love for food.

Chaat

If you want to eat chaat, the North Indian street side snack food, Delhi is the place to be. Like Spanish tapas or Greek mezze, chaat can cover a vast variety of things, but Delhi style tends to mean a deep-fried pastry shell, stuffed after cooking with potatoes, lentils or almost anything else. They're then topped with yoghurt, chutneys and chaat masala spice mix and eaten fresh.

Some typical chaat items are paapdi chaat (a mix of small round fried crispy things with yoghurt and other sauces), paneer tikka (cubes of cottage cheese baked in a tandoor with spices), pani puri or golguppa (small round hollow shells filled with a potato-based filling and a spicy sweet blend of sauces).


The best place to go for chaat is the Bengali Market (near Mandi House Metro Stn) near Connaught Place in the centre of town. The restaurants are high quality and the food is great. There are ATMs as well. One of the best known restaurants there is Nathu's. But for the really good chaat, you have to make your way to Old Delhi, and particularly to Ashok's near Chawri Bazaar. While connoisseurs insist that the best chaat is prepared on the street, most travellers try to find a comfortable middle ground between hygiene and authenticity.

Drink
Individual listings can be found in Delhi's district articles
Delhi's nightlife scene has changed in the last decade. There are plenty of modern, cosmopolitan places to separate you from your rupees. In a desperate attempt to keep the sex ratio vaguely equitable, many lounges and clubs have couples only policies (that is, no single men or men-only groups), enforced with varying degrees of strictness. While everything is supposed to shut down by 1AM, things can keep going much longer.

The coffee culture in Delhi consists mostly of large, heavily standardised chains. The two most common, Barista and Cafe Coffee Day, can be found in multiple locations across the city, most notably around Connaught Place. The UK-based Costa Coffee and the US-based Starbucks have also made a foray into the market. For listings of independent coffee shops, see the district articles.

Sleep
Individual listings can be found in Delhi's district articles
Prices quoted may not include taxes of up to 22.5%, calculated based on the published rack rates - not necessarily the price that you actually pay, which could be discounted. Smoking is not allowed in Delhi hotels.

Budget
Delhi has plenty of budget accommodation options, priced from ₹400-2,500. Many of them are located in the city centre (Central Delhi and New Delhi), while others are further south, in the affluent southern areas or towards the airport.

Mid-range
Delhi's chronic lack of quality hotels has led to a mushrooming of guest houses of widely varying quality and price. The new official 'Delhi Bed and Breakfast scheme' has also contributed a range of private rooms available for bed & breakfast accommodation. These rooms range from cheap dumps to classy rooms in the best areas of Delhi.

Splurge
Most of Delhi's expensive hotels are in New Delhi, roughly along the axis between Connaught Square and the airport. A few are located in areas further south and west. Prices in this category are generally over ₹8000.

Stay safe

Delhi at night
Many first-time travellers to India find themselves falling victim to scams and touts, and unfortunately Delhi has a lot of both. Be on guard for anybody trying to help you by giving you unsolicited directions or travel advice. Do not blindly rely on the advice of taxi and auto drivers. If this is your first time to India, do not openly admit it, as this will make you more vulnerable to touts.

Delhi is among the three unsafest cities for women in India. It is considered as the 'rape capital of the world'. It is not uncommon in some areas to receive lewd remarks or even physical touching. If you are arriving into Delhi at night, stay in either the airport lounge or well lit areas until daybreak if this is your first trip to Delhi and if you haven't booked a hotel. Try to avoid walking around alone in lanes without many people after sunset and be cautious when hiring cabs at night. Dress conservatively (preferably in Indian clothing so as to blend in). Learn to shout and consider carrying mace/pepper spray.

Carry your cash, passport, and cards in a secure money belt, with only enough cash for a few hours at a time in your wallet or other accessible place. Some recommend carrying an expendable wallet with a few ten rupee notes in it in an obvious place such as your hip pocket as a decoy to Delhi's ubiquitous pickpockets.

Several tourist agencies have been known to swindle tourists, such as by changing their travel plans or charging them extra commissions and fees. The best way to secure train tickets is by navigating through Indian Railways' website. If you have problems booking online - the Indian Railways site is unreliable - you can buy tickets in person. The best place to do so is at the Tourist Information Centre, these are located within transit hubs. Be very careful, there are many scammers surrounding the train station looking for anyone on foot and out-of-place who will "help" you find a "ticket office for foreigners," usually located in a nondescript building some blocks from the train station, where you will be overcharged and cajoled into signing up for cars, tours, etc. When in doubt, look at reviews for the information centre you are at (for example, on Google Maps). Some scammers will stand at the entrance to the train station and physically try to block you from entering, demanding to see your tickets (never mind that you need to enter the station to buy tickets!). Remember - you should be able to enter any train station just by going through a metal detector. Nobody will check your tickets before you get on a train (As a measure to control crowding at stations, many train stations may require you to purchase a platform ticket (usually costs ₹10-20) if you are just visiting and do not have a railway ticket with you.

You should also book your flight tickets online, as all the airlines have online booking systems. Otherwise, prepare to spend a good hour sorting through the charges that the tourist agency will charge.

If arriving late at night at the airport or train station, be very wary of taxi drivers trying to scam tired and unprepared tourists. A common scam is to drive you an area of town where there are roadworks or a roadblock, and tell you that the path to your hotel is blocked off and it's not possible to take you there. They'll then suggest to take you to another hotel, where they receive a commission for bringing customers. They may take you to a number of hotels first which all say they are full up, so as to increase your desperation, and hence openness to paying more. There have been reports also, of bringing tourists to a "travel agent", who will feign ringing your booked hotel to confirm that either the way is blocked, or they are overbooked and there is no room available. If you've let on that you were only staying in Delhi for the night, they may also try to convince you, that there are no hotel rooms available anywhere, and sell you an extremely overpriced private car ride to your next destination. This can be a very confusing and tiring process if you've just come off a long flight, short on sleep.

If you're arriving after midnight, it is therefore highly advisable to have accommodation pre-booked and arrange pick-up from the airport or station with your hotel, or at least have the phone number with you, so that should you get lost or caught in a sticky situation you have someone reliable to call up.

Practically everyone who handles your cash in Delhi will shortchange you, including the clerks at the police taxi kiosk at the airport and ticket sellers at historic sites and museums. It will be your word against theirs, so the only protection is to just not need change. Learn the money ASAP. Count out the smallest sum you can produce that is at least the price you need to pay. If they claim you didn't pay what you actually paid, write the cash off, walk away, and go somewhere else.

Delhi Police
The Delhi Police is a 70,000-strong force serving the capital region. While some of the police officers are honest and helpful, others may be corrupt and unhelpful.

For police assistance during an emergency dial 100.

Police vehicles (called PCR vans) are parked on almost every major intersection.

For non-emergencies, or to report a crime, visit the nearest police station.

Stay healthy
Caution	Note: Delhi and the surrounding cities, including the Taj Mahal in Agra, experiences moderate to unhealthy air quality throughout the year, resulting in smog that potentially harms the health of all residents and causes a few flight delays due to low visibility. Air quality tends to be the best in the monsoon because of the prevailing winds and frequent rainfall. It is worst during the summer and winter, as the unfavorable topography and dry stagnant weather trap all pollutants emitted within the valley.
Anyone visiting the area should try to limit outdoor and exhausting activity. Have masks (single-use surgical masks are okay), tissues, and eyedrops ready when going out.

Summer begins in early April and continues till the end of June, with the heat peaking in May. By the latter part of April or during early May. The temperatures regularly exceed 40 °C (104 °F), meaning that proper hydration is of the utmost importance. Keep yourself covered in summers to avoid a heat stroke. Drink a lot of water — around 3 litres a day — particularly in the summer.

Winter arrives in Delhi by late November or early December and continues till mid-February. In winter there can be seasonal fog; on particularly foggy days, it can be difficult to see across the street. If you are flying in or out Delhi during the winters, be aware of fog-related flight delays.

Drink only packaged bottled water to avoid water-related illness. Sticking to freshly- and well-cooked food will lessen your chances on acquiring the "Delhi belly".

Delhi is one of the most polluted cities in the world, with pollution levels often in the "severe" or "hazardous" range. Keep an eye on air quality data and consider wearing a surgical mask or other approved N95/N99 mask, especially if spending an extended time in Delhi or North India.